We'd like to automate the cracking or
breaking of the CaesarCipher.
To do this, we'll rely on frequencies
of letters in English text.
If you're encrypting a message
in another language,
you'll need to use the frequencies
from that language.
But the approach will be the same.
We'll write code to
find the character that
occurs most frequently in
the message being decrypted.
We'll assume this is the letter E,
since E occurs more frequently than
any other letter in English text.
In Russian for example, the letter
O occurs more frequently than E.
If our assumption about e is wrong,
we won't decrypt the original message.
It's possible to use more than just E,
but to rely on the frequencies of
all the letters, and use statistical
approaches to break the CaesarCipher.
In some cases these approaches will
break other encryption methods, though
not the methods used to encrypt data for
online shopping and secure transactions.
Let's look at the code for
decryption in two steps.
We need to count
the occurrences of each letter,
A through Z,
in the message we're encrypting.
We'll have code to scan in
each letter of the text and
increment a counter for
each of the 26 different letters.
Initially, all the counters are zero,
since we haven't started scanning
the text letter by letter.
Each counter is numbered from zero to 25,
because the counters are array elements.
The index from a string of 26 letters
will helps us find the right index for
the counter we'll increment
as we scan the text.
As we scan the message,
looking at each character, we'll increment
the counter at index seven for H.
Then as we scan, I will increment
the counter at index eight,
which is the index of I
in our alphabet string.
We won't increment for
the comma, or for the space.
Then we'll increment the counter
at index three for the D.
The counter at index 14 for the O.
We won't increment for the space because
space doesn't occur in the alphabet.
Then we'll increment
the counter index 24 for Y.
And we'll set the counter
at index 14 to two when
we scan the second O in the message.
When we're done scanning every character,
we'll have these values for each counter.
If you look carefully at these values,
you see that our decryption
method is likely to fail.
The value of the counter
with index four is zero.
There are no Es in this message,
but this is a very unusual message.
Now, we'll look at the code for this idea.
We scanned the message character by
character, using a standard for loop.
We find where the character occurs in
a string of each letter in the alphabet.
So that E will be found in index four.
Notice that we converted the characters in
the message being decrypted to lowercase.
We used the index in the alphabet to
increment the corresponding counter
as part of decrypting the message.
If the character wasn't in
the letters of the alphabet
the .index of method
returned negative one.
And we don't increment any counter.
The code that uses the idea E occurring
most frequently, is straightforward
developed from the ideas, algorithm,
and code you've just seen.
As you can see, the code isn't very long.
But we've created two helper methods, and
relied on the CaesarCipher class to help.
We've called a method countLetters,
which we just discussed.
This method will count the occurrences of
every character in the string encrypted,
with A being stored in the first,
or index zero location of the array
returned by the function, and
referenced here by the variable freqs.
Then we call a method maxIndex
which will return the index
of their entry infreqs
that is the largest.
The location we will assume
is where the E was shifted.
We'll find that the distance
from this location to E.
E has index 4.
Since we start with zero for A,
and then get B, C, D, E, for one,
two, three, four respectively.
If the maximal index is less than four,
we'll need to wrap around from 26,
to find the shift used for E.
If the value dkey was used to encrypt,
then 26 minus dkey
is used to decrypt, and
we return the decryptive string.
You'll be ready to use your programming
knowledge to finish the task of
decrypting.
And then apply this knowledge in the mini
project with a different cipher.
But there's some details
we want to highlight.
The array freqs in the code we just saw
has a relationship between the index and
the value in the array.
For example,
freqs of eight is how often I occurs,
since I is the ninth letter and
has index eight.
Remember, we start with index zero.
When looking for a maximum value,
as with the maxIndex that we called,
and whose implementation you see here,
we return the index of the largest value,
not the largest value itself.
We use the index to find
the distance from E.
Using the existing CaesarCipher class made
decryption much more straightforward.
In general, it is a good idea to use
code that has already been developed and
tested, rather than reinventing it.
Have fun coding.